**APC -- Familial adenomatous polyposis**

**Review of source material:**

**ClinGen:**

https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:583

**Genetic evidence:**

-   Autosomal dominant disorder

-   Case level data with evidence of probands with predicted or proven
    null variants or some evidence of gene impact - *Gayther SA et al.
    1994 Jan (PMID:816205)*

 

**Experimental evidence:**

-   Function - *Smith KJ et al. 1993 Apr 1 (PMID:8385345)*

-   Functional alteration - *Inomata M et al. 1996 May 1 (PMID:8616874);
    Baeg GH et al. 1995 Nov 15 (PMID:8521819)*

-   Models and Rescue *- Fodde R et al. 1994 Sep 13 (PMID:8090754);
    Oshima M et al. 1995 May 9 (PMID:7753829)*

**Conclusion:**

> ·   Convincing evidence with replication in \>2 publications over time
> (\>3yrs)

 

**Outcome:**

> ·   Gene-disease relationship -- DEFINITIVE

**Literature Review**

Mutations predicted to result in protein truncation, that is,
    nonsense mutations, short deletion/insertion mutations associated
    with a frame shift, mutations involving nucleotides ±1 and ±2 within
    splicing junctions, and large genomic rearrangements, are highly
    likely to impair the *APC *function and are definitely classified as
    causing FAP without additional information. These alterations
    contribute to almost all genetic variations identified through
    the *APC *gene molecular analysis (94%)" 
    *Grandval et al PMID 24599579*
    
Most truncating mutations are fully penetrant but may be
    associated with a differing severity of colorectal polyposis and
    differing risks of the extra-colorectal manifestations. Mutations in
    the central region of *APC* (codons 1290--1400) are associated with
    the most severe polyposis phenotype. Two codons (1061 and 1309) are
    mutational hotspots and account for 11% and 17% of all germline
    mutations, respectively. CHRPE is associated with mutations between
    codons 457 and 1444, while jaw osteomas and fibromatosis (desmoids
    tumors) are more prevalent in patients with mutations occurring
    after codon 1400" *Jass, PMID: 18541388*

-   "*APC* plays a central role in the Wnt-signalling pathway,
    especially in regards to the degradation of β-catenin within the
    cell cytoplasm. If *APC* is mutated, the β-catenin-Tcf complex is
    not suppressed and leads to constitutive activation of several genes
    and oncogenes controlling cell growth and division. Mutations
    in *APC* affect the ability of the cell to maintain normal growth
    and function, which results in cell overgrowth/adenoma formation.

About 25% of people with FAP do not have any family history of disease
and harbour a de novo mutation in *APC* without any clinical or genetic
evidence of FAP in the family. One study suggests that a 5 bp deletion
of codon 1309 (c.3927_3931del) is over-represented in patients with a
suspected de novo mutations (29%) and in proven de novo mutation
carriers (45%) supporting the view of codon 1309 as a hot-spot for
mutations.

New methods that can screen genomic loci at great depths are revealing
that patients that were thought to be *APC* mutation negative have
pathogenic germline heterozygous *APC* mutations, *APC* promoter
mutations, deep intronic mutations, complex genomic rearrangements,
somatic mutations or *APC* mutation mosaicism." *Talseth-Palmer PMID:
28331556*

"According to the previous published reports, the majority of
pathogenic *APC* germline mutations belong to three categories,
nonsense/frameshift mutations, splice sites mutations and deep intronic
deletions. Nonsense/frameshift mutations splice sites mutations and deep
intronic deletions of the *APC* gene lead to large genomic
rearrangements, resulting in the formation of truncated APC proteins.
Although, it has been found that in few cases, point mutations or
missense variants within the coding sequence also result in the
formation of alternative transcripts due to aberrant splicing. It has
been reported that 2% of all germline *APC* gene mutations are large
genomic deletions. Moreover, in HGMD, 1000 different *APC* germline
mutations have been reported till date (Zhao-Zhang et al, PMID: 27391059

\'**Pathogenic variants.** At least 700 germline pathogenic variants
have been found in families with an *APC*-associated polyposis condition
\[Béroud et al 2000\]. Pathogenic variants almost always cause a
premature truncation of the APC protein, usually through single
amino-acid substitutions or frameshifts. While pathogenic variants have
been found scattered throughout the gene, they are predominantly located
in the 5\' end of the gene. The most common germline *APC* pathogenic
variant is c.3927_3931delAAAGA.'

Gene reviews

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1345/ 

\'The APC gene encodes a multidomain protein that plays a major role in
tumor suppression by antagonizing the WNT signaling pathway.
Inappropriate activation of this pathway through loss of APC function
contributes to cancer progression, as in familial adenomatous polyposis
APC also has a role in cell migration, adhesion, chromosome segregation,
spindle assembly, apoptosis, and neuronal differentiation (Hanson and
Miller, 2005).\'

Omim https://www.omim.org/entry/611731 

 

The majority of these germline mutations in FAP patients were recognized
in the 5'-half of the APC gene. Nonsense (28%) or truncating frameshift
(67%) mutations are responsible for almost 95% of all APC germline
mutations in FAP disease \[17\]

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30414835/

**[Pilot application of harmonised terms:]{.ul}**

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

Altered gene product structure

Dose Change: dose reduction: Absent gene product

Decreased gene product

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_aut

**Inheritance:**

Autosomal dominant

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

Almost all mutations truncate the protein or take the form of allelic
loss. Mechanism is likely loss of function leading to reduction/absence
of gene product. Loss of APC protein causes aberrant constitutive
activation of the Wnt pathway and thus accumulation of cytosolic
beta-catenin and a lack of normal apoptosis. The majority of germline
mutations in FAP patients fall in the 5'-half of the APC gene. Nonsense
(28%) or truncating frameshift (67%) mutations are responsible for
almost 95% of all APC germline mutations in FAP disease. All targets of
the APC protein are not yet known but it may also regulate expression of
genes such as the oncogenes c-Myc and cyclin D1.

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease**

Splice region variant

Spice acceptor variant

Splice donor variant

Frameshift variant

Stop gained

Stop gained predicted to undergo NMD

Missense

In frame insertion

In frame deletion

**[Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence:]{.ul}**

Start lost
Spice acceptor variant predicted to escape NMD

Splice donor variant predicted to escape NMD

Frameshift variant predicted to escape NMD
Spice acceptor variant predicted to undergo NMD

Splice donor variant predicted to undergo NMD

Frameshift variant predicted to undergo NMD
Stop gained predicted to escape NMD
Stop lost
Gain of upstream Start \[uORF\]

Gain of upstream Start \[oORF\]

Stop lost \[oORF\]


Frameshift \[oORF\]