**CACNA1S -- Malignant hyperthermia (MIM 601887)**

**ClinGen:** https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:1397

Mutations also can be associated with malignant hyperthermia
susceptibility (MHS).

There is **no current evidence for haploinsufficiency** as a
disease-causing mechanism.

The **penetrance of MHS is unknown**. What is known is that up to 50% of individuals with MHS have undergone anesthesia uneventfully despite use of one of the agents known to trigger MH. (Tier 4)

**Literature Review:**

**OMIM:** https://www.omim.org/entry/601887

**GENEREVIEWS:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1146/

CACNA1S gene cause less than 1 percent of all cases of malignant
hyperthermia susceptibility. Mutations in the RYR1 or CACNA1S gene cause
the RYR1 channel to open more easily and close more slowly in response
to certain drugs. As a result, abnormally large amounts of calcium ions
are released from storage within muscle cells..

...Note that due to the gain-of-function disease mechanism, genetic
heterogeneity, and variable expressivity of this disorder, data from
functional studies are critical in reaching a likely pathogenic or
pathogenic classification using ACMG criteria.

rare *CACNA1S* variant, Thr852Met, of unknown significance and with a
frequency of 0.02% in the general population

**Kraeva et al, 2017, PMID: 28326467**

Variants are much less common in the *CACNA1S* gene
that encodes the α1 subunit of the skeletal muscle voltage-gated calcium
channel (interacting with RYR1 in the process of excitation--contraction
coupling).**Bayesian statistics predicted CACNA1S variant p.Thr1009Lys
and RYR1 variants p.Ser1728Phe and p.Leu4824Pro are likely pathogenic**

**Sadhasivam et al, 2019, PMID: 31559918**

Our findings, supported by the Exome Variant Server CACNA1S allele
frequencies, suggest that other previously implicated MHS variants may
be benign. Caution is warranted regarding variants claimed to be
causative for MHS, especially when used for predictive individualized
medicine.....We conclude that some RYR1 and CACNA1S variants may have
been misclassified as pathogenic without adequate genetic (e.g.,
cosegregation) or functional Gonsalves et al. Page 9 Anesthesiology.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 01. NIH-PA Author
Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript data. It is
important to stress that in addition to robust genetic analysis, there
is a critical need for a robust and non-invasive functional test for
MHS, which together with genetic data could allow accurate determination
of the prevalence and penetrance of this trait.

***Gonsalves et al, 2013, PMID 24195946***

**Pilot application of harmonised terms:**

**Inheritance:**

*Autosomal Dominant*

*Incomplete penetrance*

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_aut    

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

*Altered gene product structure*

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

Mechanism is predominantly thought to be gain-of-function disease (with genetic heterogeneity and variable expressivity), though some Loss of function variants in CACNA1S have been implicated in autosomal dominant disease

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease:**

Missense

Frameshift_variant

Splice_acceptor_variant

Splice_donor_variant

Inframe_deletion

**Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence**

Splice_donor_variant

Splice acceptor variant predicted to escape NMD

Splice donor variant predicted to escape NMD

Frameshift variant predicted to escape NMD

Stop gained predicted to escape NMD

Stop lost

Inframe_insertion

Inframe_deletion

*?? If consider haploinsufficiency as a potential MOA*

Frameshift

Splice region variant

Stop_gained

start_lost

Splice acceptor predicted to escape NMD

Splice donor predicted to escape NMD

stop_gained predicted to escape NMD

stop_lost

gain of upstream Start \[uORF\]

gain of upstream Start \[oORF\]

Stop lost \[oORF\]

Frameshift \[oORF\]
