**OTC - Ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency (MIM 311250)**

**ClinGen:** https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:8512

The relationship between OTC and ornithine carbamoyltransferase
deficiency (X-linked) was evaluated using the ClinGen Clinical Validity
Framework as of February, 2019. The OTC gene is located on the X chromosome and encodes a mitochondrial matrix enzyme that catalyzes the second step of the urea cycle. **Most patients with OTC deficiency are
hemizygous males, but female carriers can also be symptomatic**.
Variants in OTC were first reported in humans with this disease as early
as 1985 (Rozen et al., PMID 2983225). More than 400 variants
(**missense, nonsense, frameshift, in-frame indels, and large
deletions**) have been reported in humans (Caldovic et al., 2015, PMID
26059767). Evidence supporting this gene-disease relationship includes
case-level and experimental data. More evidence is available in the
literature, but the maximum score for genetic evidence (12 pts.) has
been reached. This gene-disease relationship is supported by biochemical
assays, expression studies, and model systems. In summary, OTC is
definitively **associated with X-linked ornithine carbamoyltransferase
deficiency .** This has been repeatedly demonstrated in both the
research and clinical diagnostic settings, and has been upheld over
time.

Gene Clinical Validity Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) - Version 6

**Loss of function mutations result in OTC deficiency**, a common type
of urea cycle disorder. Males are always affected and 15% of carrier
females will have hyperammonemia at some point in their lifetimes and
may have cognitive symptoms even in the absence of hyperammonemia. See
GeneReviews for Urea Cycle Disorders.

The loss-of-function and triplosensitivity ratings for genes on the X
chromosome are made in the context of a male genome to account for the
effects of hemizygous duplications or nullizygous deletions. In
contrast, disruption of some genes on the X chromosome causes male
lethality and the ratings of dosage sensitivity instead take into
account the phenotype in female individuals. Factors that may affect the
severity of phenotypes associated with X-linked disorders include the
presence of variable copies of the X chromosome (i.e. 47,XXY or 45,X)
and skewed X-inactivation in females.

There have been no reports of focal duplications of OTC.

**Literature Review:**

**OMIM:** https://www.omim.org/entry/311250

**GENEREVIEWS:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK154378/

*Pathogenic variants.*

Pathogenic variants. More than 400 pathogenic OTC variants have been
described in the literature \[Bailly et al 2015, Caldovic et al 2015,
Choi et al 2015, Gao et al 2015, Mohamed et al 2015, Prasun et al
2015\].

Additionally, 972 OTC variants, pathogenic and non-pathogenic, have been
collected and curated in the Leiden Open Variation Database.

Types of pathogenic variants:

About 17% of reported pathogenic variants are **nonsense variants, insertions, or deletions in the coding region that result in truncated protein and complete absence of functional OTC** \[Caldovic et al 2015,
Choi et al 2015, Gao et al 2015, Prasun et al 2015\]. An additional 2%
of reported pathogenic variants are **in-frame deletions and insertions
that disrupt structure of the OTC enzyme although they do not affect the
reading frame** of the OTC coding sequence \[Caldovic et al 2015\].

About **55% of reported pathogenic variants are missense variants**
\[Bailly et al 2015, Caldovic et al 2015, Choi et al 2015, Gao et al
2015\]. Although deleterious amino acid substitutions have been found
throughout the OTC protein coding region, exons 1 and 7 appear to have
fewer deleterious missense variants than other exons. This is possibly
because they encode the mitochondrial targeting peptide \[Horwich et al
1984\] and surface residues \[Shi et al 1998\], which tend to be less
conserved and more tolerant to amino acid substitutions.

About 13% of reported pathogenic variants affect **splicing of OTC
mRNA** \[Caldovic et al 2015, Mohamed et al 2015\].

An **OTC promoter variant** that disrupts interaction between promoter
and enhancer and results in reduced levels of functional mRNA and
protein has been reported \[Luksan et al 2010\].

About 12% of reported variants are **structural rearrangements
(deletions and duplications) within the OTC locus that result in
complete absence of functional OTC** \[Caldovic et al 2015, Choi et al
2015, Di Stefano et al 2015, Gallant et al 2015\].

There are no prevalent, population-specific OTC pathogenic variants
(i.e., no founder effect).

*Abnormal gene product.*

Pathogenic variants that affect mRNA splicing result either in **a
defective OTC transcript or reduced levels of functional transcript
leading to complete absence or reduced abundance of functional OTC
enzyme**.

Pathogenic variants of the consensus intron splice sequences and the
last base pair of exons 1-9 almost always result in the absence of
functional mRNA due to either absence of splicing or nonsense mediated
decay of aberrantly spliced OTC mRNA \[Tuchman et al 2002\].

Pathogenic variants that result in **creation of novel splice sites have
been found deep in OTC introns leading to aberrant splicing** and
reduced levels of functional OTC mRNA and protein \[Engel et al 2008\].

The effect of pathogenic missense variants on OTC folding and activity
depends on the chemical properties of the amino acid that is replacing
the original residue. Substitution of amino acids located either in the
active site or the protein\'s hydrophobic core result in absence of
functional enzyme due to either lack of enzymatic activity or inability
to fold \[Yamaguchi et al 2006\].

Substitution of amino acids located on the surface of the OTC protein or
remote from the active site result in partially functional enzyme due to
either reduced stability or enzymatic activity \[Yamaguchi et al 2006\].

Of the known point mutations, 27 are single base substitutions: **17
missense, 6 nonsense, 4 splice site, and the remaining 2 are single base
deletions**.

*Jang et al, 2018, PMID: 29282796*

More than 350 different mutations, including **missense, nonsense,
splice-site changes, small de-letions or insertions and gross
deletions**, have been describ-ed so far.

*Paprocka et al, 2013, PMID: 23821427*

Molecular analysis identified 37 different mutations (**22 missense, 5
large deletions, 4 small deletions, 1 insertion,3 nonsense and 2 splice
sites**) from all 49 patients; the mutations were dispersed throughout
all coding exons. In

*Choi et al, 2015, PMID: 25994866*

*Arn et al. (1989)* discussed phenotypic effects of heterozygosity for
mutations in the OTC gene. *Arn et al. (1990)* reported that **otherwise
normal women who are carriers of a mutant OTC allele are at increased
risk for hyperammonemic** coma, especially during puerperium.

Examined the genotype/phenotype correlations of 157 probands with OTC
deficiency, including 57 heterozygous females. In patients with
mutations that abolished enzyme activity, the severe clinical and
biochemical phenotype was homogeneous. The males in this group presented
within the first few days of life with high mortality and morbidity.
Most patients with the late-onset form had missense mutations in the OTC
gene, although a few had 3-bp deletions, and late-onset patients had
residual enzyme activity ranging from 26 to 74% of normal control
values. **Mutations in manifesting females were primarily of the
neonatal-onset type**. Substitutions occurring in CpG dinucleotides
accounted for approximately 31% of all mutations

*McCullough et al, 2000, PMID
[10946359])*

**Pilot application of harmonised terms:**

**Inheritance:**

*X-linked* - Primarily recessive (with milder female expression)

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_X_hem    

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

*Dose change* -decreased gene product level

*Dose change* - absent gene product

*Altered gene product structure*

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

Pathogenic variants that affect mRNA splicing result either in a
defective OTC transcript or reduced levels of functional transcript
leading to complete absence or reduced abundance of functional OTC
enzyme. Variant classes include missense, nonsense, splice-site, small
indels and gross deletions. Smaller numbers of deeply intronic (creating
cryptic splice sites) and promotor variants have been described. Males
are always affected and 15% of carrier females will have hyperammonaemia
at some point in their lifetimes and may have cognitive symptoms even in
the absence of hyperammonaemia.

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease:**

Missense

Frameshift variant

Inframe deletions

Inframe insertion

Stop gain

Stop gained predicted to undergo NMD

Spice acceptor variant

Splice donor variant

Splice acceptor variant predicted to undergo NMD

Splice donor variant predicted to undergo NMD

**Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence**

Splice region variant

Splice acceptor variant predicted to escape NMD

Splice donor variant predicted to escape NMD

Frameshift variant predicted to escape NMD

Frameshift variant predicted to undergo NMD

start_lost

stop_gained predicted to escape NMD

stop_lost

gain of upstream Start \[uORF\]

gain of upstream Start \[oORF\]

Stop lost \[oORF\]

Frameshift \[oORF\]
