**RET -- Familial Medullary Thyroid Cancer**

**ClinGen:** https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:9967

Inherited medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is primarily caused by RET
mutations that are commonly localized in exons 5, 8, 10, 11, and 13-16.
In this study, we report pedigrees for individuals with MTC that harbor
a germline S409Y variant within exon 6 of the RET proto-oncogene
.....novel germline RET S409Y variant is likely pathogenic and is
associated with lower penetrance of MTC than that for the C618Y and
C634Y mutations.

*Qi et al, 2019, PMID: 31364476*

More than 90% of the cases of MEN 2A and FMTC are caused by mutations in
one of the six highly conserved cysteine residues that are encoded by
exons 10 (codons 609, 611,618, and 620) and 11 (codons 630 and 634) of
the RET gene. In a few MEN 2A or FMTC families, mutations have been
reported involving non-cysteine domains in exons 11 (codon 631),
13(codons 768, 790, and 791), 14 (codon 804 and844), 15 (codon 891), or
a 9-bp duplication in exon 8 (8--12) ....Codon 804 mutations of the RET
exon 14,which have been detected in a few MEN 2A orFMTC families,
include single-base substitutionsresulting in a GTG !TTG (V804L),
GTG!CTG(V804L), or GTG!ATG (V804M) missensechange (11, 15--21). It has
been assumed that mutation in non-cysteine domains, including codon 804
in exon 14, results in a weaker onco-genic activation of the RET protein
and an attenuated form of the MEN 2A or FMTC phenotype compared to that
observed in patientswith cysteine domain mutation at codon 634 ofexon 11
(20, 22, 23). This proposal is supportedby clinical observations showing
a late onset andpossibly a reduced penetrance and expression ofthe
disease phenotype in families with codon 804mutations of the RET exon 14
(11, 20)

*Patocs et al, 2003, PMID: 12694233*

**Pilot application of harmonised terms:**

**Inheritance:**

*Autosomal Dominant*

*Optional modifier -- incomplete penetrance*

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_aut    

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

Altered protein product

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

The molecular mechanism of disease in MEN2a (including the isolated
familial medullary thyroid cancer) is gain of function, resulting from
an activating missense germline mutation of the RET proto-oncogene (a
tyrosine kinase). Most MEN2A/FMTC cases result from missense mutations
that lead to ligand-independent dimerization (constitutive activation),
located in one of six cysteine codons in the extracellular domain of the
encoded protein (codons 609, 611, 618, and 620 in exon 10 and codons 630
and 634 in exon 11. In a few families a small in frame duplication and
small 2bp indel have been found. Attenuated phenotypes may be associated
with cysteine domain mutations at codon 634 of exon 11 and at
non-cysteine residues (including codon 804 in exon 14)

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease:**

Missense

Inframe_deletion

Inframe_insertion

**Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence**

splice_acceptor_variant predicted to escape NMD

splice_donor_variant predicted to escape NMD

frameshift_variant predicted to escape NMD

stop_gained predicted to escape NMD

Stop lost

**Not included**

splice_region_variant

splice_acceptor_variant

(splice_acceptor_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

splice_donor_variant

(splice_donor_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

Frameshift_variant

(frameshift_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

Stop_gained

(stop_gained predicted to undergo NMD)

start_lost

5_prime_UTR_variant

3_prime_UTR_variant

(gain of upstream Start \[uORF\])

(gain of upstream Start \[oORF\])

(Stop lost \[uORF\])

(Stop lost \[oORF\])

(Start lost \[uORF\])

(Frameshift \[uORF\])

(Frameshift \[oORF\])

(Stop gained \[uORF\])
