**RET -- Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2a (MIM 171400**

**ClinGen:** https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:9967

Numerous variants have been reported in RET in relation to multiple
endocrine neoplasia type A , the majority being **missense mutation in
conserved cysteine amino acid residues within the dimerization and
activation domain, including p.C609, p.C611, p.C618, p. C620, p. C630,
p.C634 (reviewed Plaza-Menaho et al., 2006; PMID: 16979782). The
molecular mechanism for the RET-multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A is
gain of function (**GOF**), as the missense mutations result in
ligand-independent dimerization that induces activation of the RET
protein that is a receptor tyrosine kinase (Plaza-Menaho et al., 2006;
PMID: 16979782; Drilon et al., 2017, PMID 29134959). There are variant
databases specific to the RET gene including the Multiple Endocrine
Neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) and RET database
(http://www.arup.utah.edu/database/MEN2/MEN2_welcome.php) and the RET
gene LOVD database (https://databases.lovd.nl/shared/genes/RET).
Substantial evidence supports this gene-disease relationship includes
case-level data, segregation and experimental data with the maximum
score (12) for genetic evidence reached. This gene-disease relationship
is supported by functional studies including expression, cell assays and
animal models, several that were patient derived pathogenic variants
expressed in the mouse (reviewed in Wiedmann et al, 2016; PMID:
26184857). These animal models developed MEN2A related tumors including
medullary thyroid carcinomas. Of note, **Multiple endocrine neoplasia
IIB (MIM:162300) follows a different GOF mechanism and has variants
specific to this disease** entity and has been curated separately. Due
to variants asserted in Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MIM:155240),
Pheochromocytoma (MIM:171300) with both multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2A and type 2B, the evidence for each of these was lumped into the
appropriate gene-disease relationship based on the variant asserted for
the evidence.

**Literature Review:**

**OMIM**: https://www.omim.org/entry/171400 and 162300

**GENEREVIEWS:** <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1257/>

Pathogenic variants. The most common pathogenic variants are
**non-conservative substitutions located in one of six cysteine codons
in the extracellular domain of the encoded protein.** They include
codons **609, 611, 618, and 620 in exon 10 and codons 630 and 634 in
exon 11** \[Takahashi et al 1998\]. All of these variants have been
identified in families with MEN 2A and some have been identified in
families with FMTC. Pathogenic variants in these sites have been
detected in **98% of families with MEN 2A** \[Eng et al 1996\]. See
Table A for a database of RET variants \[Margraf et al 2009\].

The risk for aggressive MTC, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism
can be estimated based on genotype. See Table 3 for management
recommendations.

In addition to the pathogenic variants in the cysteine residues in exons
10 and 11 that have been found in families with **MEN 2A, pathogenic
variants in codons 631, 768, 790, 804, 844, and 891, and others in exons
5, 8, 10, 11, and 13-16, have been identified in a small number** of
families \[Hofstra et al 1997, Berndt et al 1998, Kloos et al 2009,
Wells et al 2015\].

**Small, in-frame duplications have been reported in four** families
\[Höppner & Ritter 1997, Höppner et al 1998, Pigny et al 1999,
Niccoli-Sire et al 2003\].

Rare families with **two pathogenic variants in cis configuration** have
been reported; for example, alteration of both codons 634 and 635 in one
family with MEN 2A; alteration of both codons 804 and 844 in one family
with FMTC \[Bartsch et al 2000\]; and alteration of codons 804 and 806
in an individual with MEN 2B \[Miyauchi et al 1999\].

Distribution of RET Mutations in Multiple Endocrine

Neoplasia 2 in Denmark 1994--2014: A Nationwide StudyAccounting for 36%
of all families, RET germline mutations of codon 611 were the most
frequent. Subsequently, mutations of codons 634 (17%), 918 (14%), 618
(11%), 620, (8%), 631 (3%), 790 (3%), 804 (3%), 852 (3%), and 883 (3%)
followed (Table 3). No mutations of codons 292, 515, 533,609, 630, 666,
750, 768, 891, 904, or 912 were identified.

***Mathieson et al, 2017, PMID: 27809725***

In 1994 a study performed by the International RET Consortium (IRC)
\[35\] analyzed 477 MEN 2 kindred and demonstrated that about 94% of
cases presented with a RET germline mutation affecting one of the
following codons: 609, 611, 618, 620, 634, 768, 804 and 918. In the
present series, the percentage of RET positive families (193/195, 98.9%)
was higher than that reported in the IRC study.

***Eng et al 1996 PMID PMID: 8918855 Elisei et al, 2019,
PMID: 31510104***

More than 90% of the cases of MEN 2A and FMTC are caused by mutations in
one of the six highly conserved cysteine residues that are encoded by
exons 10 (codons 609, 611,618, and 620) and 11 (codons 630 and 634) of
the RET gene. In a few MEN 2A or FMTC families, mutations have been
reported involving non-cysteine domains in exons 11 (codon 631),
13(codons 768, 790, and 791), 14 (codon 804 and844), 15 (codon 891), or
a 9-bp duplication in exon 8 (8--12) ....Codon 804 mutations of the RET
exon 14,which have been detected in a few MEN 2A orFMTC families,
include single-base substitutionsresulting in a GTG !TTG (V804L),
GTG!CTG(V804L), or GTG!ATG (V804M) missensechange (11, 15--21). It has
been assumed thatmutation in non-cysteine domains, includingcodon 804 in
exon 14, results in a weaker onco-genic activation of the RET protein
and anattenuated form of the MEN 2A or FMTCphenotype compared to that
observed in patientswith cysteine domain mutation at codon 634 ofexon 11
(20, 22, 23). This proposal is supportedby clinical observations showing
a late onset andpossibly a reduced penetrance and expression ofthe
disease phenotype in families with codon 804mutations of the RET exon 14
(11, 20)

***Patocs et al, 2003, PMID: 12694233***

**Pilot application of harmonised terms:**

**Inheritance:**

*Autosomal Dominant*

*Optional modifier -- incomplete penetrance*

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_aut    

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

Altered protein product

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

The molecular mechanism of disease in MEN2a/b is gain of function,
resulting from an activating missense germline mutation of the RET
proto-oncogene (a tyrosine kinase). MEN2A results from missense mutations that lead to
ligand-independent dimerization (constitutive activation), located in
one of six cysteine codons in the extracellular domain of the encoded
protein (codons 609, 611, 618, and 620 in exon 10 and codons 630 and 634
in exon 11. In a few families a small in frame duplication and small 2bp
indel have been found. LOF mutations in RET are associated with
Hirschsprung disease.

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease:**

Missense

Inframe_deletion

Inframe_insertion

**Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence**

splice_acceptor_variant predicted to escape NMD

splice_donor_variant predicted to escape NMD

frameshift_variant predicted to escape NMD

stop_gained predicted to escape NMD

Stop lost

**Not included**

splice_region_variant

splice_acceptor_variant

(splice_acceptor_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

splice_donor_variant

(splice_donor_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

Frameshift_variant

(frameshift_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

Stop_gained

(stop_gained predicted to undergo NMD)

start_lost

5_prime_UTR_variant

3_prime_UTR_variant

(gain of upstream Start \[uORF\])

(gain of upstream Start \[oORF\])

(Stop lost \[uORF\])

(Stop lost \[oORF\])

(Start lost \[uORF\])

(Frameshift \[uORF\])

(Frameshift \[oORF\])

(Stop gained \[uORF\])
