**RET -- Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2b (MIM
162300)**

**ClinGen:** https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:9967

The gene RET was first reported in relation to autosomal dominant
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN2B) characterized by very early
onset medullary thyroid cancer, pheochromocytoma, parathyroid tumors and
dysmorphic features first reported in in 1994 (Hofstra et al, 1994
PMID:7906866; Carlson et al. 1994 PMID:7977365). Earlier evidence
suggested that the disease MEN2B mapped to chromosome 10 (where the RET
gene is located) as early as 1990 (Norum et al., 1990 PMID:1979053).
**One variant, p.Met918Thr, is responsible for nearly all cases of
MEN2B, and it is estimated that around 50% of the reported cases of
MEN2B are de novo** (Carlson et al. 1994 PMID:7977365; Plaza-Menaho et
al., 2006; PMID: 16979782). Another RET variant (**p. Ala883Phe) has
been asserted to be responsible for the development of \~5% of MEN2B**
(Smith et al., 1997 PMID:9294615). The molecular mechanism for the gene
RET in the disease entity MEN2B is **gain of function**. While similar
to RET-MEN2A (described in a separate curation), in that the mechanism
is GOF, the mechanism(s) responsible for the two disease entities are
distinct. In MEN2B the p.Met918Thr variation occurs in exon 16 of RET in
the **tyrosine kinase domain which causes autophosphorylation and
activation of RET.** There is a significant amount of case-level data
with the maximum points for genetic evidence reached (12 points). This
gene-disease relationship is supported by functional studies including
expression, cell assays and animal models, several that were patient
derived pathogenic variants expressed in the mouse (reviewed in Wiedmann
et al, 2016 PMID: 26184857). These animal models developed carcinomas
consistent with the disease multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B.

**Literature Review:**

**OMIM**: https://www.omim.org/entry/171400 and 162300

**GENEREVIEWS:** <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1257/>

Approximately 95% of all individuals with the **MEN 2B phenotype have a
pathogenic variant in the tyrosine kinase domain of RET at codon 918 in
exon 16,** which substitutes a threonine for methionine \[Eng et al
1996\]. A second pathogenic variant, **p.Ala883Phe, resulting from a
two-nucleotide inde**l, has been found in 2%-3% of individuals with MEN
2B \[Gimm et al 1997, Smith et al 1997\]. **Two variants in cis
configuration on one RET allele** have been reported in individuals with
MEN 2B (see Table 5 for codon 804 in combination with 778, 805, 806, and
904) \[Miyauchi et al 1999, Menko et al 2002, Cranston et al 2006, Kloos
et al 2009\].


Rare families with **two pathogenic variants in cis configuration** have
been reported; for example, alteration of both codons 634 and 635 in one
family with MEN 2A; alteration of both codons 804 and 844 in one family
with FMTC \[Bartsch et al 2000\]; and alteration of codons 804 and 806
in an individual with MEN 2B \[Miyauchi et al 1999\].

Distribution of RET Mutations in Multiple Endocrine

Neoplasia 2 in Denmark 1994--2014: A Nationwide StudyAccounting for 36%
of all families, RET germline mutations of codon 611 were the most
frequent. Subsequently, mutations of codons 634 (17%), 918 (14%), 618
(11%), 620, (8%), 631 (3%), 790 (3%), 804 (3%), 852 (3%), and 883 (3%)
followed (Table 3). No mutations of codons 292, 515, 533,609, 630, 666,
750, 768, 891, 904, or 912 were identified.

***Mathieson et al, 2017, PMID: 27809725***

In 1994 a study performed by the International RET Consortium (IRC)
\[35\] analyzed 477 MEN 2 kindred and demonstrated that about 94% of
cases presented with a RET germline mutation affecting one of the
following codons: 609, 611, 618, 620, 634, 768, 804 and 918. In the
present series, the percentage of RET positive families (193/195, 98.9%)
was higher than that reported in the IRC study.

***Eng et al 1996 PMID PMID: 8918855 Elisei et al, 2019,
PMID: 31510104***

**Pilot application of harmonised terms:**

**Inheritance:**

*Autosomal Dominant*

*Optional modifier -- incomplete penetrance*

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_aut    

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

Altered protein product

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

The molecular mechanism of disease in MEN2b is gain of function,
resulting from an activating missense germline mutation of the RET
proto-oncogene (a tyrosine kinase).  While similar
to RET-MEN2A (described in a separate curation), in that the mechanism
is GOF, the mechanism(s) responsible for the two disease entities are
distinct. In MEN2B the p.Met918Thr variation occurs in exon 16 of RET in
the tyrosine kinase domain which causes autophosphorylation and
activation of RET. In MEN2B nearly all cases are caused
by one variant, p.Met918Thr (50% *de novo*) with 5% caused by
p.Ala883Phe. LOF mutations in RET are associated with
Hirschsprung disease.

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease:**

Missense

Inframe_deletion

Inframe_insertion

**Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence**

splice_acceptor_variant predicted to escape NMD

splice_donor_variant predicted to escape NMD

splice donor variant

frameshift_variant predicted to escape NMD

stop_gained predicted to escape NMD

Stop lost

**Not included**

splice_region_variant

splice_acceptor_variant

(splice_acceptor_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

(splice_donor_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

Frameshift_variant

(frameshift_variant predicted to undergo NMD)

Stop_gained

(stop_gained predicted to undergo NMD)

start_lost

5_prime_UTR_variant

3_prime_UTR_variant

(gain of upstream Start \[uORF\])

(gain of upstream Start \[oORF\])

(Stop lost \[uORF\])

(Stop lost \[oORF\])

(Start lost \[uORF\])

(Frameshift \[uORF\])

(Frameshift \[oORF\])

(Stop gained \[uORF\])
