**RYR1 -- Malignant hyperthermia (MIM 145600)**

**ClinGen:** https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:10483

The **penetrance of MHS is unknown**. What is known is that up to 50% of
individuals with MHS have undergone anesthesia uneventfully despite use
of one of the agents known to trigger MH. (Tier 4)

**Loss of function variants in RYR1 have been implicated in autosomal
recessive and autosomal dominant** diseases. The autosomal recessive
conditions include congenital fiber-type disproportion (CFTD) (10-20% of
cases) and Multiminicore disease (MmD), especially cases associated with
ophthalmoplegia (in a small minority of cases). The variants in these
diseases are **mostly missense mutations, not large deletions or
duplications**. Autosomal dominantly-inherited conditions include
Central Core Disease (CCD) and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility
(MHS). Most autosomal dominant cases of CCD are also associated with
variants in RYR1, but notably there also have been reported occurrences
of autosomal recessive variants in RYR1 for this condition. Rossi et al
2006 (PMID 17293538) reported a family with a single-nucleotide
deletion in exon 100 that led to a deletion of the last 202 amino
acids (p.R4837fsX4839). Although the father and his two daughters were
all confirmed to have this mutation, only he was clinically affected
based upon the standard in vitro contracture test (IVCT). Of note,
however, the daughters did have the same histologic changes in the
skeletal muscle fibers so their lack of clinical findings could be due
to reduced penetrance. Monnier et al 2001 (PMID 11709545) identified
three in-frame amino acid deletions (c.12640 del9nt, c.13938 del6nt, and
c.14578 delttc) that led to CCD in three multi-generation families
meeting clinical criteria and histologic findings in skeletal muscles.
None of the mutations was found in 100 unrelated chromosomes from the
general population. In up to 70-80% of cases of MHS, variants in RYR1
are believed to be causative. Most mutations associated with MHS are
**single nucleotide substitutions, but a single amino acid deletion
resulting in deletion of a conserved glutamic acid** at position 2347
(p.G2347del) was reported as the first deletion mutation. Sambuughin et
al 2001 (PMID 11389482) identified this in two unrelated families with
this mutation in multiple affected family members. Interestingly, the
same variant was observed in autosomal dominant MHS and autosomal
recessive lethal neonatal hypotonia in the same family. Monnier et al
2009 (PMID 19734047) described a child with lethal neonatal hypotonia
who had compound heterozygosity for mutations in RYR1 including
p.Lys929_Ser3713delinsAsn (leading to an in-frame large deletion
extending from exon 23 to exon 76) and a non-synonymous p.Ser2279dup,
exon 42. Given that both parents were confirmed carriers, each for one
of the mutations, and were unaffected, these were presumed to be
recessive mutations for the neonatal hypotonia. However, the father who
was the confirmed p.Ser2279dup carrier was found by IVCT to meet
diagnostic criteria for autosomal dominantly inherited MHS trait.

**Literature Review:**

**OMIM:** https://www.omim.org/entry/145600

**GENEREVIEWS:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1146/

Note that due to the **gain-of-function disease** mechanism, genetic
heterogeneity, and variable expressivity of this disorder, data from
functional studies are critical in reaching a likely pathogenic or
pathogenic classification using ACMG criteria.

**Missense variants** in the ryanodine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) are
associated with malignant hyperthermia but only a minority of these have
met the criteria for use in predictive DNA diagnosis.....Segregation
analysis is of limited value in assessing pathogenicity of RYR1 variants
in malignant hyperthermia. Functional analyses in HEK293 cells provided
evidence to support the use of p.R2336H, p.R2355W, p.E3104K, p.G3990V
and p.V4849I for diagnostic purposes but not p.D3986E.

*Merritt A et al, 2017, PMID: 28403410*

The majority of mutations (96%) so far detected in the RYR1gene in
association with MH and/or CCD are **missense changes**(Table 2 and
Supplementary Table S1, which is available online
athttp://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/1059-7794/suppmat). Approximately
40% of RYR1 mutations occur at CpG dinucleotide sequences, with almost
all mutations occurring in the heterozygous state and homozygotes being
reported on rare occasions, e.g.,mutation p.C35R described by Lynch et
al. \[1997\]. In cases of **MH41% of reported mutations are
recurrent**, accounting for MH susceptibility in 80% of genotyped
families.

*Robinson, 2006, PMID: 16917943*

It is recognized that the lack of penetrance of the clinical MH
phenotype can be for non-genetic reasons, as some people who develop MH
are known to have had previous exposure to triggering anesthetics with
no apparent problem.

*Riazi, 2018, PMID: 28902675*

A recent study compared the predicted and actual consequences of
missense mutations and found that half of the de novo or low-frequency
missense mutations found by genome sequencing and inferred as
deleterious, correspond to nearly neutral variants that have little
impact on the clinical phenotype of individual cases.48 Similarly, a
significant proportion of RYR1 sequence variants in the human gene
mutation database classified as "disease-causing mutations" was found to
be benign, probably benign, or as being of unknown pathogenicity.37

The present report documents, in exon 44 of RYR1 in two unrelated,
MH-susceptible families, a 3-bp deletion that results in deletion of
a conserved glutamic acid at position 2347. This is the first deletion,
in RYR1, found to be associated with MH susceptibility.

*Sambuughin, 2003, PMID: 11389482*

Exome sequencing was performed on 870 volunteers not ascertained for
MHS. Variants in RYR1 and CACNA1S were annotated using an algorithm that
filtered results based on mutation type, frequency, and information in
mutation databases. .....In RYR1, the authors identified 65 **missense
mutations, one nonsense, two that affected splicing, and one
non-frameshift indel**

*Gonslaes, 2013, PMID: 24195946*

**Pilot application of harmonised terms:**

**Inheritance:**

*Autosomal Dominant*

*Incomplete penetrance*

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_aut    

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

*Altered gene product structure*

*(Decreased gene product level)*

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

Mechanism is predominantly thought to be gain-of-function disease (with
genetic heterogeneity and variable expressivity), though some Loss of
function variants in RYR1 have been implicated in autosomal dominant
disease. The penetrance is unknown but recognised to be incomplete. Most
variants are missense (some recurrent), though a small number of
nonsense, splicing, and non-frameshift deletions are noted.

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease:**

Missense

Nonsense

Splice_acceptor_variant

Splice_donor_variant

Inframe_deletion

**Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence**

Splice acceptor variant predicted to escape NMD

Splice donor variant predicted to escape NMD

Frameshift variant predicted to escape NMD

Stop gained predicted to escape NMD

Stop lost

Inframe_insertion


*?? If consider haploinsufficiency as a potential MOA*

Frameshift

Splice region variant

Stop_gained

start_lost

Splice acceptor predicted to escape NMD

Splice donor predicted to escape NMD

stop_gained predicted to escape NMD

stop_lost

gain of upstream Start \[uORF\]

gain of upstream Start \[oORF\]

Stop lost \[oORF\]

Frameshift \[oORF\]
