**SMAD3 -- Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 3 (MIM 613795)**

**ClinGen:** https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/genes/HGNC:6769

**Literature Review:**

**OMIM:** https://www.omim.org/entry/613795

**GENEREVIEWS:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1133/

*Pathogenic variants.* Most variants in SMAD3 are predicted to lead to
loss of function. This is supported by the fact that about half of the
currently reported pathogenic variants lead to nonsense or out-of-frame
frameshift variants \[Wischmeijer et al 2013\]

This protein functions as a transcriptional modulator activated by
transforming growth factor-beta (provided by RefSeq, Apr 2009).

*Abnormal gene product.* Despite the predicted loss-of-function nature
of most SMAD3 pathogenic variants, a paradoxic gain of function on the
overall TGFβ signaling pathway in aortic walls of affected individuals
has been observed \[van de Laar et al 2011\].

212 individuals with 51 SMAD3 variants, including m**ore than 10
nonsense, partial gene deletions and frame shift variants, as well as
many missense and in-frame variants** in MH2 and MH1 domain of the gene.
The median age at first aortic event was significantly lower in
individuals with SMAD3 MH2 missense variants than those with
haploinsufficient variants but there was no difference in frequency of
aortic events by variant type.

*Hostetler et al, 2019, PMID 30661052*

11 patients (11.7%) had SMAD3 variants (**3 frame shift, 1 splicing, an
in-frame deletion in exon 6 (part of MH2 domain) and a loss of
initiation codon**). Regarding the in-frame deletion of exon 6 was
likely familial since the Proband\'s father and paternal grandmother
were both affected and died in their 30s.

*Overwater et al, 2018, PMID* 29907982

Novel SMAD2/3 and TGFB2/3 variants - multiple **nonsense, frame shift
and splicing variants** in SMAD3 gene.

*Schepers et al, 2018, PMID 29392890*

SMAD3 mutations cause a **frameshift and premature stop of translation,
or substitution of highly conserved amino acids**, which are predicted
in silico to have a pathologic effect. As such, the pathogenic mechanism
underlying these mutations is **probably loss of function**. Comparable
to several other conditions presenting with arterial aneurysms, such as
MFS, LDS and ATS, loss of function mutations in SMAD3 seem to lead to a
**paradoxical increase in TGFbeta signaling** in the aortic wall.

*Wischmeijer et al, 2012, PMID 23554019*

**Pilot application of harmonised terms:**

**Inheritance:**

*Autosomal Dominant*

**Allelic requirement:**

Monoallelic_aut    

**Disease associated variant consequences:**

Decreased gene product level

Absent gene product

Altered gene product structure

**Narrative summary of molecular mechanisms:**

Mechanism is likely to be predominantly loss of function due to
pathogenic splice site, frameshift, premature stop, or substitution of
highly conserved amino acids variants that lead to a paradoxical
increase in TGF-beta signaling in the aortic wall. In frame variants and
partial gene deletions are also reported.

**List variant classes in this gene proven to cause this disease:**

Nonsense

Splice_acceptor_variant

Splice_donor_variant

Frameshift_variant

Inframe_deletion

Missense

**Potential novel variant classes based on predicted functional
consequence**

Splice_region_variant

Splice_acceptor_variant predicted to escape NMD

Splice_donor_variant predicted to escape NMD

Frameshift_variant predicted to escape NMD

Start_lost

Stop_gained predicted to escape NMD

Stop_lost

In frame insertion

5_prime_UTR_variant

Gain of upstream Start \[uORF\]

Gain of upstream Start \[oORF\]

Stop lost \[uORF\]

Stop lost \[oORF\]

Start lost \[uORF\]

Frameshift \[uORF\]

Frameshift \[oORF\]

Stop gained \[uORF\]
